In those early years, what courses did you teach? I
taught agricultural prices, agricultural
policy, and futures and options markets. These
were three-hour courses. Three-hour courses,
and then I taught a futures and options course at
both the graduate, well, not the early years, no,
just those three. They were undergraduate? Yeah.
Juniors and seniors? Well, one of them, I'm sorry,
one of them was a graduate. Well, okay, I taught
undergraduate prices and graduate prices. Price
analysis is a big deal in agricultural economics.
Then I taught ag policy at the graduate level, and
then I taught futures and options at the
undergraduate level. And normally these were,
the students who took those were majoring in what?
They did major in agricultural economics. These
were almost all majors. These weren't service
courses. All right, and by the time we get to the
late 60s, there are women admitted How long was it
before you had some coeds in those classes? Well,
a while. We didn't have, you didn't have any
females in agricultural economics. I'm trying to
think. There were few and far between until just
recent years, by recent I mean the last 10, 15. I
can't really If you remember, I guess we had some in
the early 70s, but there weren't many. Of those
early courses, which one was your favorite? Which
one did you enjoy most? Well, I think probably the
most fun was the Futures and Options course
because it was something that was happening
daily. You could check the newspaper. The markets
went up and down. It was very applied. Give some
examples of some of the changes, sharp changes or
lack thereof that you could relate to in class.
Well, every day was a new day in the futures market
because whatever happened overnight would
affect whether it was weather or international
policy changes or war or whatever. You'd have a new
set of prices the next day in the futures market,
which you could use as examples. And then when you
had drought situations like you have now, or when
you have surplus situations. Of course, you had
dramatic changes in prices. And there was always a
daily example to use in your teaching. And out of
the Wall Street Journal, you could cut almost
every day in the Commodities column, there was
something you could talk about which was going on
in the real world. So unlike history, where I had to
revise my notes every year, which I'm sure is going
to do, too. Did they have term papers? I had a term
paper. We had an ongoing futures trading problem,
which they would turn in their trades like once a
week for as many as, I don't know, two or three
commodities they kept track of. And then at the
end, they had to write this up as a series of hedges
or risk management exercises in the futures
course. Then in the price analysis course, they
were supposed to try to explain the price behavior
for some commodity, which is pretty tough for
anybody. Most of us aren't very good at that. But
that was the assignment. Yeah, term papers are
more prevalent then than they are now, I think. In
terms of the student body, students in those
courses, what commodities were of least interest
and of most interest to them? Well, cotton and
wheat are big in Texas. See, that's part of what's
changed, too, is when I got here, almost everybody
on the faculty was a farm boy. Mm-hmm. They had come
from farming or farm-related. And the students, I
think, were almost 100% probably agriculture or
agriculture community. And over the times, that
has changed greatly. I suppose they were probably
going back to agriculture. Not now. Not at all, not
now. The major commodities of interest to them
were the ones in Texas where they'd come from.
Cotton, wheat, cattle. If it was in the valley, it
could have been orange juice because it was a
frozen concentrated orange juice futures
contract. So it's mainly because of where they're
from. For you as a mature adult, were you ever
struck by the fact that they should have been more
interested in this commodity or that one, but
apparently were not? Well, not so much. Once in a
while, they get enamored with gold futures
because they thought, well, here's the chance to
make big bucks. I'll become a speculator. And you
had to talk them out of that and tell them, no, we're
interested in just the opposite. We're trying to
manage risk, not create it. But you'd get kids that
would go off the deep end once in a while in some
commodity like gold or silver, platinum,
futures. By and large, what would have been the
typical enrollment in a section
in those years? 40 would have been big. 25 to 35
students. That was what our big classroom was
probably 50, our big classroom, and that was not
always full. Now, did you have a TA or any kind of an
assistant? Yeah, we always had TAs, as I recall. We
had good teaching support from a teaching
assistant standpoint, and if you wanted to,
depending on the schedule, you wanted to use them.
And I usually graded my own tests, but they would
grade the exercises, things like that. Yeah, we
had good support. Share some anecdotes of
faculty-student relations in those 60s and 70s,
those earlier years, when it was largely an
all-male student body. Yeah, again, the
students, I don't know if it was sort of the Aggie
Corps thing, but they were not hostile, but they
were, at least I felt a little bit, we do our thing
and you do yours. You know, when we come to class, we
do, we may be sleeping in class, but we come to
class. They did come to class, they didn't cut
class, And they did their work. I didn't run, I was
not advisor, strangely enough, I was never
advisor to a core unit. So I didn't get into, we had
kids over to our house, like I can remember we had a
core commander over there and when we were with the
MSC council with Wayne Stark, we got to know a lot of
student leadership through SCONA and things like
that, where we had good student interaction with
the students. But I don't remember any other than
helping a bunch of students get down off of the Ag
building the week before Christmas where they had
been perhaps drinking something they shouldn't
have been. And they were up there singing. And
somebody in the library complained. And when the
police came, I helped talk them out of taking them
to jail. Other than that, I can't remember any
really glaring. student relations problems.
What about students trying, giving you some kind
of excuse that you thought might have been
stretching the truth about... You had a few that
you weren't ever too sure about people, how sick
they were and so on. Mostly thinking about their
work. There wasn't a lot of that. Most people kind
of like, they minded their business, it seemed to
me like it, were pretty straight up with it. So I
don't have any creative Nothing about turning in a
paper late or why they missed the final? No, didn't
have a lot of that trouble. It's amazing how many
people got married at the end of the semester that
seemed to have to be out in somebody's wedding.
That turned up a lot, which we had to try to work
around on occasion. One of the most interesting
things I ran into was, this was in later years, I
found a student who had hired a tutor who was
sitting in on the course with him. I had never
encountered that before, and the guy had
presented it to me, the tutor had presented it to
me, and said, you know, I'm just really interested
in our course economics. Would it be okay if I just
sat in on this course? Sure, I'm not going to
discourage intellectual, you know, motivation.
So he did, and it came to find out that he was doing
the same thing in another course, and the two of us
got together, the two professors, accidentally,
two teachers, and found out this guy was actually
hiring this guy as a tutor. So I put a stop to that.
Did you find out what the fee was? No, I didn't. I
just said, man, you're out of here. That would have
been when? In the 90s? Yes, it was in the 90s. I'd
never heard of it before. Maybe it went on, but no, I
didn't. Because you didn't have that many people
visiting your class. And what about scholastic
dishonesty in those early years? Well,
fortunately, or frequently, your classroom
would be such that you could place people... a desk
between them. And if not, you tried to use A and B
tests, you know, and things like that. But I don't.
Now, Curtis Lord tells me that, you know, cheating
is rampant now. I don't know that it is. I don't
remember having that much trouble with it. Once in
a while you'd catch somebody who had the A answers
on the B test, and that was a clear-cut case, and
you'd tell them, you know, you're out of here or
something. Nobody ever contested it. Nowadays,
I'm not sure what you might, probably might get
into if you had to go to court or something like
that. But I didn't notice a lot of them. Maybe I was
just naive. Did anybody in your almost 40 years,
did anybody in a position of authority ever infer
to you or candidly tell you that you needed to pass a
certain percentage or flunk a certain percentage
or anything like that? Nobody ever told me how to
teach a course. Nobody ever told me Well, I did get a
call from the athletic department once about a kid
who subsequently was out of here anyhow,
inquiring about some grade and if I was sure I had it
right and so on and so forth. I wasn't sure what the
message was, but they never did pursue it. But
nobody ever called me in the dean's office and
said, you know, we need to have a different grade
here. At least I don't recall ever being
interfered with in a classroom. As far as I was
concerned, I had total academic freedom at that
level, which was either good or bad news because
maybe I needed more direction than I got. But
nobody ever interfered that way. And in those
early years, where did you post your grades? On the
wall with the name and the number. Everybody saw
everybody's grades. Had you encountered that at
Penn State or Oklahoma A&M? I can't recall that we
didn't. I mean, I'm not saying I don't remember. We
probably did, but... We didn't do that at Rice or
Austin College, no. See, I'm not recalling that we
posted the grades that way, but we sure did here,
that's right. In the department in those early
years, were there some key courses that,
according to the students, were the tough
courses?
Yeah, we introduced one sort of an
econometrics-type course at the undergraduate
level. That was sort of a filter course. Then I
think they probably thought Production
Economics 325 was a lot of work.
I'm not sure about 105. That was our introductory
course. Who taught it? Everybody took that. J.C.
Grady. J.C. Grady taught the 105. He was the
father, so to speak, of the undergraduate
section. But I would guess those are the ones, the
317, econometrics course. Now, that was in
agricultural economics. I think when you went
over to economics, see we took courses all over the
place, in business and economics, some of the tech
fields, animal science and so on. Probably the
toughest time to have would be over in economics,
having maybe income and employment or and that
sort of thing, macroeconomics. Were there any
courses in the department that supposedly,
according to the students, were kind of easy, kind
of crip courses? Well, I'm sure there were, and we
had a guy named Dr. Dan, the grade point man, but
that was sociology. Yeah, what did you hear from
the students about, where did he get that nickname
and why? Well, I presume that he was fairly easy on
the grading. I don't know, but he... Dr. Dan had
gotten his, he had a cut on his nose. It clearly had
been cut. The legend was that he'd gotten a knife
fight or somebody had knifed him. His degree was
from the University of Chicago. I believe he had a
master's. He may have been a PhD. I'm not sure. But
other than that course, again, I didn't have that
much. Some guys have a much better or closer or
whatever, I guess, relationship with students.
Not that I didn't talk to the students. Not that my
door wasn't open. But I didn't have a lot of
interaction with students. Let's see, this is Dan
Davis. No, no, this wasn't Dan Davis. Dan Russell.
Dan Russell. Yeah, Dan Russell. And he's the one
that deserves credit for thinking up the project
house idea back in the Depression. I didn't do
that. I believe he's the one. Dr. Dan. He was a fine
old gentleman. Of course, all these guys were.
Because I heard a legend once. I heard a legend one
time that
he had posted his grades and there was an
appropriate A, B, C, D, E, F break. And a student
came to the department wanting to check on his
grades and the secretary looked in the grade book
and he had gotten a higher grade turned in than the
grade posted on the door. What? He really didn't.
Now that's just a myth, I don't know. Let's go back
to your point on grading because when I got here,
grades were 93 and up was an A. There were 70 and
below was an F. Yes. And only 30 points were for
actual, the D was 70 through 77, I think, or 76. So it
was grading, when it reduced to 60, I don't know if
that was the Vietnam War or when they brought that
in, but That changed, that certainly changed the
grading system. But when you as a new faculty
member gave a grade on an essay test, didn't you
first decide whether this question deserved an A,
B, C, D, or F? And then you assigned the appropriate
points under that system. Well, each question had
its own points, its own weight. Yeah, yeah, yeah,
right. Well, no, actually, when I got through, I
just looked at total points. No, but was it tougher
to make an A under that system? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah.
You think it was? Oh, yeah. Well, you mean under the
system now? Yeah, because we had just squished it
up. So there was a, yeah, I think grading was
tougher back then. I mean, I think it was lower. All
right, as the years go, as we're going to start
going now chronologically,
You think that the typical member of the
department, and particularly you, thought it was
good for A&M to make the changes in co-education,
non-compulsory core, racial integration, and so
forth? Yes, I think that was agreed. Do you
remember any departmental realities regarding
the first female students, how they were received
and so forth?
You know, that's a good question. I really don't.
There would have been so few that they would have
been noticed, that's for sure. But you don't
remember any? I don't remember any adverse or
positive. What about black students? Aspects of
that. Gosh, black students came so late to our
department. We get so few black students in
agricultural economics. Fred McClure sticks
out. I was about to say. Yeah, yeah. But they're
rare as undergraduates, even as graduate
students. We don't get many black students.
Describe what you recall about Fred McClure as a
student and as a leader. Strangely enough, Fred is
one guy I missed in my course. In my course,
everybody had to pass through it. But that year,
somebody else taught it. We taught two sections,
and I didn't get to have Fred in the class. But he was
a presence to be reckoned with and very active.
very popular, but I never did really get to know him
through a class. I missed him, and I regret that
because he, and I've known him better later when he
comes back to the department, but he was certainly
exceptional, no question about that. When did you
all begin to get any international undergraduate
students? Well, first of all, we don't have many
international undergraduate students.
Graduate students, yes. Mexico, I think probably
we'd get some few from Mexico. But it'd be
interesting to know today just how many we have
international, very few international graduate
students. Not a whole lot out of state
undergraduates. We're so heavily Texan. And
geographically, where down through the years,
where have the undergraduate students come from
in Texas? Well, through the years, it's changed. I
mean, you know, now it's Houston, what, Houston,
Dallas, San Antonio, Austin. Then it was like
towns. But still, even in agricultural
economics, I noticed up until recent years, I had
kids fill out every first of my class, I always had
them fill out a slip. Where are you from? Hometown.
What was your hometown mascot? You know, your high
school mascot, stuff like that. And I was
surprised how many of them came from small towns,
even in the 90s. The ones we were getting here were,
many were from small towns. There were some from
Houston and places, but still a lot of rural areas
in Texas are sending them at least into
agricultural economics. And as far as you were
aware, they thought that they were going into the
real world of agricultural economics. Well, they
did, and yet if you'd ask them how many are going
back to the farm, they weren't. There were very few
who were going back to the farm. You know, two or
three hands might go up in the whole class. But
agribusiness has become the word of the day. We
have changed, and that's part of the name change
controversy. What do we change our name to? And
many agricultural economics departments have
changed their name to agriculture and applied
economics or something like that, or
agribusiness economics. And we haven't, but we
have an agribusiness major, and it's very
popular. It's with the business school, so you
have to have a little higher grades to get into it.
But so they go, most of them do go to work with
something agriculture-related, but a
significant number don't. I mean, they go out
totally divorced from agriculture. All right, in
the early years when you get here, about, What was
the proportion of the graduate enrollment to the
undergraduate in majors? Well, it'd be much, much
less. When I was, we had, first of all, we didn't
have a Ph.D. program, as I recall. Okay. I don't
think we had a Ph.D. program. So we had master's. I
could be wrong on that, but I don't. I reckon how
many master's degrees be finished a year? Yeah,
well, I don't know, four, five, six, maybe. So it
was much more heavily undergraduate. When I was
sort of administering the graduate program, we
had 200 graduate students. When was that? That
would have been, oh, late 70s and through the 80s. I
had that about 9 or 10 years. Gave it up in 87 or
something like that, 88, I don't know. And we had
200 graduate students, 40 or 50 of those were
really Ivan Shmederman's real estate students.
But they were part of our department. And 50 PhDs,
100 master of science. Oh, man, I'm not used to
talking this much. And then we had at one time, we
peaked out, I think, at 800 undergraduates. So we
were close to 1,000 in this department. We're not
that high now. And we're not that many graduate
students now. Those graduate students, where
were they from geographically? Most of them would
have been from Texas. A few you get from the north,
northeast. What about international?
International, mostly Asian, and some from
Africa, a few from Africa. We got, at a certain
point in time, we got a lot of Peace Corps kids come
back through here, female Peace Corps kids. I can
count five, six, seven. who are now out in
professional positions as agricultural
economists who were Peace Corps females. And then
also males came back. We got a slug of Peace Corps
people, still get some Peace Corps people. I think
they come back, you know, seeing that eating is
important and they want to feed the world and they
typically get a degree and go into a regular
professional agri-economics position
somewhere in a faculty.
But we've never been heavy on, we've gotten a few
from, I can name like one or two guys from the
Netherlands We had one through here from Germany,
but not many from Western Europe have we had in
graduate school. Now, Dr. Tim served as
department head until about when? Well, I want to
say around 1970. I want to say. That may be too late,
but I think so, yeah. When did the department have
any discussions about how it was going to progress
to become bigger, better, stronger? Oh, yeah. We
had departmental studies. couldn't pull them off
the shelf for you, but I don't know if it was
mandated from the top down or we thought it up
ourselves, but where are we going, whom should we
be serving, who's our audience, what's our
mission, how do we want to, you know, and continual
sort of a rolling thing on are we teaching the right
courses and stuff like that. So we've had, there's
a name for those studies, but I can't think of it
right now. As you recall those discussions, What
did the department normally agree upon as the
strengths and the weaknesses of the department at
that? Well, we had to sort of pick among areas. Like
in agricultural economics, you have marketing,
production economics, resource economics,
community economics, and so on. And we sort of
decided, well, we're going to try to get good in
marketing. We're going to be good in marketing.
and little left synthesis maybe on production
economics or something and do less of that more of
the more resource economics that got popular not
going to do labor economics you know stuff but i
can't i think probably marketing dr tim's sort of
favorite marketing and policy he liked
agricultural policy so we have an agricultural
policy center here which i'm not sure how
instrumental he was in it but that we do have one Did
the dean and vice president of academic affairs,
was there support for this effort above the
departmental level, as far as you all know? You
mean studying? Well, this progress that you all
were hoping to make. Haskell, I don't know. I
couldn't tell you. But you don't know of anything
where you all sent forth a recommendation, it was
turned down? No, I don't know that there wasn't
support for it. I just don't know. what happened at
those levels. Did you all feel like that there was
some fiscal ability to make some of these changes?
Yeah, I think so. And, again, back in those days
where you got your money allocated by formula from
the federal sources, and state support was, I
think, probably not too bad in Texas. I'm not sure
how it stacked up compared to Iowa or something
like that. But I don't think resources were all
that limiting at that time. uh... and i think we
looked at other departments i think ty did and then
john hopkin came in from illinois who was new blood
as department head and he'd been around he'd been
vice president of bank of america or something in
california or that bank of america i'm not sure
where his office was but uh... he was new blood new
directions and his idea was just to hire as many
good people as he can and he did but i think ty looked
at other departments to see what they were doing
describe uh... hopkin He came about in 1970? Yeah,
he would have come from Illinois. He had been, I
believe, vice president of Bank of America in San
Francisco, California. John was a finance.
Agricultural finance became a really hot issue
and a hot item, and we started hiring finance
people right after John got here, some of them from
the University of Illinois. But John's approach
was, I'm going to hire the best people I can and then
let them do what they want to do. and, you know, let
them get their own money, or give them money as I
can, but he was, he wasn't an automatic pilot, but
he was pretty much a more academic, he was a more
academic department head, I think, and probably
Ty was a little more authoritarian. In the search
for a new department head, was there any
departmental involvement? Yeah, there
certainly was, there must have been with John, I
know there was quite a bit with Padberg when he came
in. But with Hopkins, I'm sure there was some, yes.
I just can't remember how extensive it was. I'm
sure he came for an interview. And in his personal
religious faith, he was a newcomer, wasn't he?
Yeah, yeah. There weren't many LDS, and John
certainly was that. He was prominent, I know, in
the church. Describe his leadership style. Well,
I
think John was an enabler. He would help you. If
you'd go and explain to him why you thought you
wanted to do something and you justified, he would
try to help you. As I say, his policy, I think,
basically, as I observed it, was I'm going to hire
the best people I can and then let them do their
thing. He wasn't heavy-handed, and I think he took
pretty good care of us. He had some fights with
the... fights, I say, with the dean or with the
director of the experiment station in a
good-natured fashion. I think they were pretty
much good-natured, but I think he would go to bat
for the department and try to get some things that
he thought were needed. Did you all feel that he had
the same level of influence, comparatively
speaking, that Dr. Tim did? Well, he didn't have
the old boy hookups. He wasn't an Aggie. He wasn't a
Texan. But I think that he... and was pretty able to
hold his own, yeah. And Dr. Tim ceased being
department head because of retirement. Yeah, and
Ty, yes, I think it was that, partly his health, but
I think retirement. At that time, didn't you have
to retire at a certain age? Yeah. I think that's
what got him. And Ty, he didn't live very long after
that. Well, and what I wanted to make clear is that
it was not, he wasn't a terminator. No, no, no, I
never had. knowledge that he was forced out or
anything. I don't think so. And by this time, Harry
Kunkel is the dean. Right. And did the department
have any impression of him, you think? Well, I
think he was a very good researcher and teacher.
Dr.
Kunkel was clearly an intellectual, I think. He
was a thinker. And impression as a dean, I'm not
sure he He was dean and director, let's see, of
Experiment Station? Both, maybe? Yeah.
Terrible, I can't remember. But he'll tell you.
President Rutter dies in early 1970.
What did you and your colleagues, what was your
perception of him as Texas A&M's president and
leader?
Well, he was clearly not really tuned to the
academic scene, we thought, of course, as young
Turks, but very respected, I think, for his
honesty and forthrightness. I always thought of
him as like Nixon going to China, that only Nixon
could go to China because of who he was, and only
President Rudder could have integrated Texas A&M
both racially and even more so female thing. He was
the man for the time. Certainly Morgan couldn't
have done it before him, I don't think. He just did
that. And I think he was fair-minded. Probably
would have liked to have been approached more by
the faculty than he was. And I think probably he may
have felt somewhat isolated from the faculty
because he wasn't, you know, a degreed, in a sense,
terminal degreed person. But I don't think he was,
I think he was certainly respected, and I think he
was a man for the time and the place, just ideal. Did
you all ever talk about his ability as a public
speaker? Yeah, yeah, bless his heart. You know, he
just really didn't turn you on that way. I mean, you
were patient, but he, and I think he knew it. I think
he knew he was not a public speaker, but I think he
dreaded it. I don't think he looked forward to it at
all. Were you aware that his health was declining
not long before his death? Well, it's amazing how,
you know, you see people change when they get in the
office. And when he came in, he was a fairly...
looked like a normal person. But I noticed that he
just ballooned over time and just... He really
looked like the... I think the strain on him must
have been fantastic. It must have been. And, of
course, you eat all those rubber chicken and pea
dinners, and he just didn't handle that well. I
mean, I think he was... Maybe he was just too
conscientious. He just bore too much stress. He
didn't take care of himself.